## 5.5.4 Testing different banjo necks {#testing-different-banjo-necks .entry-title}

Here is an informal listening challenge to try. Necks were fabricated
from four different timbers, but all other details were nominally
identical. The necks were fitted in turn to the same banjo pot, and
several recordings were made of the same tune. The question now is: can
a listener recognise which neck is which?

![Figure 1. The four necks; from the top: maple, mahogany, walnut and
white oak. Image copyright David Politzer, reproduced by
permission.](uploads/2022/07/Banjo-neck-set-1.jpg){width="100%"}

![Figure 2. The test banjo, with a mahogany neck fitted. Image copyright
David Politzer, reproduced by
permission.](uploads/2022/07/banjo-by-fence.jpg){width="100%"}

A set of these sound files has been trimmed to the same short snatch of
music in each case. First, you hear these played using necks which are
identified by their timber choice. After that, there are 5 files
labelled A--E. These contain one example of each of the four timbers,
plus a second recording made using one of them. Can you marry these up
with the first four sounds? You might want to use your best available
audio reproduction option for this task, either headphones or
loudspeakers.

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/wal_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 1. A neck in walnut

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/wok_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 2. A neck in white oak

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/mhg_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 3. A neck in mahogany

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/mpl_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 4. A neck in maple

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/A-pick_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 5. Test sound A

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/B-pick_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 6. Test sound B

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/C-pick_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 7. Test sound C

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/D-pick_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 8. Test sound D

<audio controls="" src="uploads/2022/06/E-pick_short.mp3"></audio>
Sound 9. Test sound E
