## 6.2 The hardware of hearing {#the-hardware-of-hearing .entry-title}



Before we start to grapple with psychoacoustics, it is useful to know a
little about how human hearing works. Figure 1 shows a diagram of the
main components. Sound waves from the outside world enter through the
external part of the ear, into the *auditory canal*. This is an acoustic
duct, which functions rather like an ear trumpet to concentrate the
energy of the sound wave before it reaches the *tympanic membrane*, or
*eardrum*. The sound level at the eardrum is boosted by up to 15 dB
compared to the incident sound wave, peaking around 3 kHz. The eardrum
is a membrane that is set into vibration by the incoming sound wave. The
next part of the system is the *middle ear,* containing three tiny bones
(the *malleus*, *incus* and *stapes*) which act as a kind of lever
system to increase the force available from the vibration.

![Figure 1. Diagram of the components of a human ear. Image:
Inductiveload, CC BY-SA 2.5
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5>, via Wikimedia
Commons](uploads/2021/02/1348px-Anatomy_of_Human_Ear_with_Cochlear_Frequency_Mapping.jpg){width="100%"}

Now we enter the most important region, the *inner ear*. The complicated
shape drawn in purple indicates a cavity within the bone of your skull.
It has two main components. The *semi-circular canals* are associated
with our sense of orientation and balance: it has components which
behave rather like the accelerometers and gyros that you may have inside
your mobile phone, to sense accelerations and rotational movement.

The component we are most interested in is the second one, the
*cochlea*. It is wound up into a shape like a snail shell: indeed, the
word "cochlea" derives from the Greek for a snail. The cochlea is a bony
cavity, and it is filled with fluid. It has two "windows": flexible
membranes that hold the fluid in, but able to bulge in and out . The
final bone of the chain in the middle ear, the stapes, presses against
one of these windows, the *oval window*, and it pushes it in and out as
a result of the incoming sound wave. The fluid inside the cochlea is
virtually incompressible, so to accommodate this movement there is a
second window, the *round window*, which can bulge in the opposite sense
to the oval window.

To see the point of this, we need to know a bit about what is inside the
cochlea. Figure 2 shows an "unrolled" view of it. Glossing over a lot of
complicated anatomical details ([see
Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cochlea) if you want to know
more), the crucial component for our purpose is called the *basilar
membrane*. This membrane bridges across the cochlea from side to side.
The oval window introduces acoustic disturbances on one side of it,
while the round window allows them to "escape" on the other side. The
resulting fluid flow in the cavity exerts a force across the basilar
membrane, making it vibrate.

![Figure 2. Diagram similar to Fig. 1, but showing the cochlea unrolled
to reveal the pattern of peak frequency response along the length of the
basilar membrane. Image: Kern A, Heid C, Steeb W-H, Stoop N, Stoop R, CC
BY 2.5 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.5>, via Wikimedia
Commons](uploads/2021/02/1600px-Uncoiled_cochlea_with_basilar_membrane-1024x611.jpg){width="100%"}

Now for the important part: the mechanical properties of the basilar
membrane vary, by an enormous factor, along the length of the cochlea.
At the end near the two windows, it is narrow and stiff, while at the
far end it is wider and floppier. The result is that the basilar
membrane functions as a kind of mechanical frequency analyser. If the
incoming sound wave is sinusoidal, the vibration response of the basilar
membrane is concentrated in a particular region: near the base for a
high frequency, near the far end for a low frequency. Some positions of
maximum response for different frequencies are indicated in Fig. 2 (but
note that more recent research suggests that the lowest indicated
frequency may be a bit misleading: the peak frequency at the end of the
cochlea may be 50 Hz).

The basilar membrane carries a large number of *hair cells*, which are
the neural sensors for vibration. So, at least to an extent, the
information reaching the brain along the auditory nerve is already
sorted out into its frequency content, simply because nerve fibres
originating from hair cells attached at different positions on the
basilar membrane will tend to respond most strongly to sounds in
different frequency ranges, appropriate to the position of each one. We
will see in section 6.4 that some aspects of this mechanical filtering
action of the basilar membrane carry over rather directly into the way
we hear.

When you listen to sound that is sufficiently quiet, this mechanical
response of eardrum, middle ear and basilar membrane involves
small-amplitude vibration, and can be described reasonably well by the
kind of linear theory we have been using up to now. But the sound does
not need to become very loud before the response starts to exhibit
progressive nonlinearity. In any case, from here on the process of
hearing is very definitely nonlinear. The nervous system communicates in
the form of electrical pulses, so the brain is essentially a digital
device. The information from individual hair cells is coded, somehow, in
the rate and detailed timing of the pulses generated and sent off along
the auditory nerve by the neurons connected to them.

However, this is not the end of mechanical effects that influence
hearing. Not all the hair cells are sensors. Some of them, indeed the
majority of them, behave like loudspeakers: they cause additional motion
of the basilar membrane in response to nerve signals coming back from
the brain or from a more local reflex action. These active hair cells
are known as *outer hair cells*, whereas the sensing hair cells are
*inner hair cells*. Sometimes, the action of the outer hair cells
results in sound coming out of the ears: so-called *[otoacoustic
emissions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Otoacoustic_emission)*. Some
kinds of tinnitus are the result of real sounds generated in the ear in
this way. The details of the excitation of the basilar membrane by these
active hair cells are still a matter of current research, but it appears
that this process is crucial to the phenomenal range of loudness that
our ears are capable to responding to.

For more detail of all aspects of cochlear mechanics, see the
comprehensive review by Ni et al. \[1\].



------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[1\] Guangjian Ni, Stephen J. Elliott, Mohammad Ayat, and Paul D. Teal:
"Modelling cochlear mechanics", *BioMed Research International*, Volume
2014, Article ID 150637, 42 pages
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/150637>
