## 5.2 "Can you make it louder?" {#can-you-make-it-louder .entry-title}



Not all stringed instruments are intended to be loud. Some instruments
were developed in a context where music was performed for the private
enjoyment of the influential few, whether in courtly ceremonies or
aristocratic dinner parties. However, there must always have been
outdoor music requiring loud instruments, and over the last couple of
centuries the development of public concerts and large concert halls has
motivated evolution of instruments to make them louder and louder.

For a plucked or struck instrument, there is a balancing act to be
performed. For a given amount of energy put into the string by the
player, you can either let it leak out to the body quickly or slowly.
This leakage rate is determined entirely by the magnitude of the scaled
admittance, as was shown in section 5.1.2. The plot of this scaled
admittance from the previous section, comparing three different
instruments, is reproduced here for convenience. Compare the results for
the guitar and the banjo. The curve for the banjo lies well above the
one for the guitar, over virtually the entire frequency range. The banjo
will be louder (no surprise there), and it will inevitably have a sound
that dies away quickly because the energy is used up fast. If a long
sustain is wanted, to allow long legato lines, loudness must be
sacrificed. To get both, there must be a lot of energy in the string in
the first place: this is the background to the evolution of the modern
piano, with strings so heavy and tight that players ordinarily use
mechanical assistance (from the piano mechanism) to excite them: they
don't play with their fingernails like a guitarist.

![Figure 1. A repeat of Fig. 8 from section 5.1: scaled bridge
admittance magnitude, for three different stringed instruments. Red
curve: a violin; purple curve: a classical guitar; blue curve: a banjo.
The frequency scale is expressed in semitones, starting from the lowest
tuned note of each instrument. Successive octaves are indicated by
ticks.](uploads/2020/11/Fig132_4_215_602-1-1024x768.jpg){width="100%"}

Bowed instruments are different: the scaled admittance still governs the
rate at which energy is extracted from the string into the body, but now
the player is constantly feeding energy back into the string with their
bow. The trade-off between loudness and sustain does not apply: a bowed
note can be sustained as long as the player's bow arm permits. The
different designs of the violin and the guitar have come about to
exploit this key difference.

Compare the curves for the violin and guitar in Fig. 1. At the lowest
frequencies, a few strong resonances of the guitar produce peaks higher
than the corresponding low-frequency peaks of the violin. (The reason
that the violin cannot tolerate peaks as high as those of the guitar
lies in a phenomenon of bowed-string instruments called the *wolf note*:
we will come back to this in Chapter ?.) But at higher frequencies, from
about semitone 24 on the axis scale here, the violin curve rises
steadily above the guitar curve. By semitone 40 or so, it reaches very
similar levels to the banjo. This suggests that the violin has been
designed to extract energy quickly from the string in this
higher-frequency range, allowing it to be quite loud. We will find out
in section 5.3 about a particular feature of the design of the violin,
that is mainly responsible for this strong divergence from the behaviour
of the guitar. But no-one chooses a pizzicato violin to play legato
lines of the kind possible on the classical guitar or the harp.

We will return yet again to this plot and the comparison between these
three instruments in section 5.3. But before that we digress a little to
enquire what, if anything, an instrument maker might do to increase
loudness, and what are the associated hazards and pitfalls. If the
energy from the string is to 'leak' into the body more rapidly, strings
must be chosen with the highest possible wave impedance, while the
admittance of the body must be made as large as possible. In other
words, you want to put heavier and heavier strings on lighter and
lighter instruments. The limit on that process might be set by the sound
getting *too* loud, but usually something else goes wrong first: the
structure of the instrument body fails under the stress of the string
tensions.

Instrument designers need to exercise ingenuity to get round this
problem. One extreme example is the modern piano. Unlike earlier
instruments like the harpsichord, a substantial metal frame is used to
carry the string tensions, separate from the wooden soundboard that
serves to convert the energy from the vibrating string into sound. Piano
strings have become extremely heavy as well: indeed, the typical strings
of a modern concert grand are not what you would ordinarily call
'string' at all: imagine trying to tie a parcel with piano wire 1 mm in
diameter.

The violin gives an example that is less extreme, but arguably more
ingenious. A number of features of the violin play a role in helping to
withstand the string tension. That is not to say that this is the *only*
reason for these design features: as in other highly-evolved designs,
many details manage to fulfill multiple functions. But for the moment we
will concentrate on this aspect. First, it is useful to see how far down
the line of "making it louder" the violin has been pushed. The total
tension of a typical set of violin strings is around 20 kg (or around
200 N). The strings turn over the bridge through an angle around
$25^\circ$, resulting in a downbearing force on the violin's top
plate around 10 kg. That much weight is supported on a panel of softwood
that may be less than 3 mm thick.

![Figure 2. A violin by Antonio Stradivari, labelled to highlight some
design features discussed in the
text](uploads/2020/11/Strad_labelled.jpg){width="100%"}

Figure 2 highlights a few features of the violin that help it withstand
the stresses. Number 1 is rather general: notice that all the component
parts of the violin body are curved in some way, rather than flat. The
top and back plates are arched, the thin pieces of maple forming the
*ribs* are curved. As is familiar from structures like bridges, an arch
is much better than a flat beam or panel when it comes to withstanding a
downwards load. We already know the reason for this, from the discussion
in section 3.2 of curved shells compared to flat plates. A flat plate
can only resist loading through bending, but a curved shell
automatically brings in forces of compression or tension. This tends to
make it stiffer: recall the discussion of corrugated roofing panels.

Feature number 2 directs attention to the shape of the f-holes. In
common with many other stringed instruments, the violin body has "sound
holes" in order to create a Helmholtz resonance. As discussed in section
4.2, this produces an extra resonance at low frequency to help the bass
response of the instrument, and also improves the sound radiation
efficiency of low modes of the body.

Less obviously, there are advantages in the violin having slot-shaped
holes. The slots create a rather flexible "island" between the holes,
exactly where the bridge sits, and we will see in section 5.3 that this
flexibility is implicated in a major difference in acoustical behaviour
between the violin and the guitar. But putting slots close to the bridge
is dangerous. If simple rectangular slots were used, the sharp corners
would create *stress concentrations*, and cracks would soon form in the
softwood of the top plate, starting from these corners. To avoid this
problem, both ends of the slot are curved over, avoiding the sharp
corner. There are two choices: you could bend both ends the same way,
producing C-holes as seen in some earlier instruments like viols, or you
bend the two ends in opposite directions, producing the familiar f-holes
of the violin.

Feature number 3 shows two blue rectangles, indicating two important
structures inside a violin, the soundpost and bassbar. These have an
important acoustical consequence, described briefly in section 5.1 (see
Fig. 3), but they also help with the problem of withstanding the stress
from the strings. The downbearing force is transmitted through the feet
of the bridge, so that placing a reinforcing beam under one foot and a
supporting pillar near the other will obviously help.

Feature number 4 is the *purfling* around the edge of the top and back
plates. The black lines of the purfling are not painted on (except in
very cheap mass-produced instruments): instead, a three-layer sandwich
of dark-light-dark wood is inlaid into a slot painstakingly cut around
the edges of the plates. Purfling has an important aesthetic effect, and
violin-makers put a lot of effort into making it look just right. But
this apparently decorative feature of the violin also serves a practical
function. The edges of a violin, especially on the top plate, are
vulnerable to being knocked, which can start a crack running in from the
edge. Inlaying strips of wood across the grain close to the edge gives
some protection against this.

The features numbered 5 and 6 go together. Some of the most famous and
valuable violins are several centuries old already. Despite the best
efforts of their makers, most of them have suffered damage during that
time. But these instruments look in good condition, and are still being
played regularly. They have all been repaired over the years, and there
are two features of the construction that have allowed repairs to be
effected without leaving eye-catching scars. When a violin maker has to
make a major repair, they will remove the top plate to open the box up.
This can be done without causing much damage because the box is held
together with gelatin-based animal glue which is strong enough, but
slightly less strong than the surrounding wood. A violin repairer can
remove a top plate by carefully inserting a flat-bladed knife like a
table knife into the glue layer, and working it around the edge to crack
the joint apart. (The label in Fig. 1 marks the joint of the back plate
rather than the top plate, simply because it is more easily seen in the
picture. But it is very rare to remove a back plate: nearly all repairs
of this kind involve the top plate.)

Having done the repair, the top plate will be glued back on. Another
ingenious feature is now revealed. Even with care and skill, the act of
opening a joint like this will probably cause some damage, so that the
joint does not fit back together quite as snugly as was originally the
case. But look again at Fig. 2: the plates fit to the ribs with
overhanging edges, so that the glue joint is in a rather dark and
obscure corner. So a tiny amount of damage near this joint will not show
as much as it would have done without that overhang. An instrument like
the lute does not have this feature. Just as with the violin, it is
occasionally necessary to open up a lute for maintenance, but it is very
much harder to remove the top plate and effect an invisible replacement.

Finally, feature 7 is another very general one, and it brings us back to
our original question, "Can you make it louder?". It concerns the choice
of material out of which the violin is made. Material choice is an
important topic, and what we have to say next is relevant to many
stringed instruments, not just to the violin. A simple argument based on
making an instrument as loud as possible can be used to derive a
criterion for selecting material. This criterion is widely used by
instrument makers: but I suspect that they often do not remember that it
is based on such a crude objective.

Violins, and most other stringed instruments, are ordinarily made of
wood: in particular, top plates or soundboards are usually made of
spruce or cedar of some kind. If a violin-like instrument were to be
invented today, would wood be the obvious choice of material, given the
huge range of artificial materials now available? We can use the
criterion of loudness to develop a simple *index of merit*, then use an
intuitively-appealing graphical method developed by Ashby \[1\] to
survey the whole gamut of available materials, to see what would make
the best choice by maximising that index of merit.

Within the limitations of the super-crude approach we are using here, we
already know what is needed to make a louder instrument: we want to
maximise the typical level of the bridge admittance. We can suppose that
the length and width of the instrument body are fixed (being governed by
tradition and the ergonomics of playing), but that the plate thickness
might need to be varied depending on the material. This thickness will
be governed by a requirement that the vibration resonances occur at
roughly the usual frequencies --- any big deviation from the norm is
likely to produce an instrument which doesn't "sound like a violin". It
is not realistic to hope to fix all the individual resonant frequencies,
but it is easy to ensure that the *average spacing* of modes has the
correct value. The details are described in the next link.

[[SEE MORE DETAIL]{.has-inline-color
.has-vivid-red-color}](#merit-index-for-soundboard-material-selection)

The conclusion is that we want to choose the material that maximises a
certain index of merit. It goes under various names in the literature
(such as "radiation ratio"), and it can be written in several different
forms. One form that is commonly seen is the ratio of the speed of sound
to the density (see the previous link for details). This form is
relevant to instrument makers because of the availability of a
commercial measuring instrument called a "Lucchi meter", which allows
the speed of sound in a billet of wood to be measured directly.

For the purpose of the Ashby argument, we need to write the index of
merit in a different form, as a combination of *stiffness* and
*density*. If we were only dealing with *isotropic* materials (ones like
metals with the same properties in all directions), the combination
would be $E/\rho^3$, where $E$ is Young's modulus and $\rho$ is
density. (The Greek letter $\rho$ is pronounced "rho": for some
reason, it is the conventional symbol used to denote density.) There is
a complication that we will come back to in a moment, but first we can
meet Ashby's ingenious approach. In this problem, as in many other
questions about material choice in engineering design, the index of
merit we want to maximise takes the form of a *product of powers* of the
material properties: in this case $E$ and $\rho$. There is an easy
graphical way to visualise any such combination.

![Figure 3. The Young's modulus $E$ and density $\rho$ of all
engineering materials, plotted on log-log axes. The red lines relate to
selection for a musical soundboard, as described in the
text.](uploads/2021/01/Ashby_map_2-1024x1022.jpg){width="100%"}

The first step is to gather up those two properties of every material,
and combine them in a plot like Fig. 3. Each particular material would
appear as a dot in this plot, or more commonly as a small blob because
the properties of any given type of material are always somewhat
variable. Blobs are marked for materials like "steels", "diamond", and
"Nylon". These are grouped within larger blobs, outlined with thicker
lines, gathering classes of material together: metal alloys, ceramics,
plastics, foams, and so on. Logarithmic scales are used on both axes,
because $E$ and $\rho$ both range over several orders of magnitude.

But this log-log scale does more than that: a straight line with slope
3, like the two slanting red lines shown in the figure, will
automatically join materials that share the same value of
$E/\rho^3$. (The mathematical reason is that $E/\rho^3=K$ means
that $\log E -3 \log \rho = \log K$, which is the equation of a
straight line of slope 3.) So, for example, the right-hand red line
suggests that soundboards made of lead and of silicone rubber would give
equally loud violins. Neither of those materials sounds very promising,
and that is because they fall towards the right-hand side of the plot.
To maximise our index of merit, we want to push the slanting line as far
to the left as we can, as indicated by the arrow.

What do we find, as the left-most materials? We find the region for
woods, parallel to the grain. The next-best material falls in the top
left of the blob for composite materials: specifically, the label
"CFRP", standing for carbon-fibre reinforced plastic. So soundboards
should probably still be made of wood, with the second choice falling to
a carbon-fibre composite of some kind. This is very reassuring: wood is
indeed what most instruments use, but there are some
commercially-available instruments (especially guitars) using a
"sandwich" construction involving a light core material with a layer of
carbon fibre on each side.

But we need to come back to the snag mentioned earlier. Wood is not an
isotropic material: the stiffness of wood is usually significantly
different in the grain direction, compared to any cross-grain direction.
The chart in Fig. 3 acknowledges this: there are two blobs for the wood
data, showing each individual type both parallel and perpendicular to
the grain. Our index of merit needs to combine both these stiffnesses,
and as was explained in the previous link a natural choice would fall
mid-way between these two blobs on the logarithmic scale. Figure 4 shows
a close-up of the plot, just showing the data for woods, and including
an indication of this intermediate region.

![Figure 4. A close-up of the wood data from Fig. 3, with a dashed
region indicating the required combination of stiffnesses parallel and
perpendicular to the
grain.](uploads/2021/01/Ashby_map_3a-1024x874.jpg){width="100%"}

The plot indicates that the very best material for a soundboard would be
balsa wood. If loudness were the only criterion, this is probably a
correct deduction. Indeed, some balsa violins have been made, and they
work well. However, balsa is so lightweight that it raises other issues,
particularly of robustness. The material is simply too fragile to
withstand the rigours of a typical violin's life. Instead, violin makers
typically opt for carefully selected spruce, which combines a reasonable
value of our merit index with a reasonable degree of robustness.

Looking back at Fig. 3, you might be wondering why wood has such extreme
properties, compared to the wide range of man-made materials. To see the
reason, we need to put a piece of soundboard-quality spruce under the
scanning electron microscope to see its microstructure. Figure 5 shows a
typical example. A softwood like Norway spruce (*Picea abies*) consists
mainly of cells called *tracheids*, which are long, thin-walled tubes
running vertically in the growing tree. It consists mainly of empty
space, in fact. The structure is rather like a box of drinking straws.
This kind of structure is very efficient for reducing density while
preserving a good level of stiffness, exactly the combination needed to
put the material into an extreme position in the Ashby plot.

![Figure 5. A sample of spruce (Picea abies) seen in the scanning
electron microscope. The vertical direction in the growing tree is
horizontal in this image. On the right we see a cross-grain section
through the wood cells, showing the seasonal modulation in size that
creates the annual rings in the tree. The left half of the picture shows
the long tracheid cells running vertically in the growing tree and
making up the 'grain' of the
wood.](uploads/2021/01/spruce-1024x718.jpg){width="100%"}

There are indeed man-made materials with a similar structure: the most
common are various kinds of hexagonal honeycomb structure, used as the
core material in doors or in the floor panels of aeroplanes. The
difference is that in these materials, the "cells" are of centimetre
scale, whereas wood cells are about three orders of magnitude smaller.
This small size is what allows wood to be treated as a homogeneous
material, able to be carved into complicated shapes like the top of a
violin. As technologies like 3D printing develop, it is becoming
feasible to make materials with microstrucure approaching this fine
scale: perhaps in a few years we will be able to print artificial wood,
or indeed complete violin tops.



------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[1\] Michael F. Ashby; "Materials selection in mechanical design",
Butterworth-Heinemann (Fourth edition 2011).
